# Working with the Math and Random Classes

## Using the Math class

Java API contains the `java.lang.Math` class, which has methods for performing basic numeric operations such as the elementary exponential, logarithm, square root, and trigonometric functions.Java API containsthe java.lang.Math class, which has methods for performing basic numeric operations such as the elementary exponential, logarithm, square root, and trigonometric functions.

Since it belongs to the `java.lang` package, it is accessible for all other classes with no need to import it explicitly. There´s also no need to instantiate it because all its methods are static.

In the exam scope, these are the basic methods you need to know:

### `abs`

Returns the positive (absolute) value of the given argument. Like most of the Math´s methods it is overloaded so it can accept several numeric types.

```java
double d = Math.abs(-1.5);
int i = Math.abs(-42);
```

### `ceil`

Returns the smallest integer greater or equal to the float or double passed by parameter.

```java
double d = Math.ceil(1.2);   // assigns 2.0 to d
float f = (float) Math.ceil(-1.2f); // assigns -1.0f to f
int i = (int) Math.ceil(1.2); // assigns 2 to i
```

### `floor`

Returns the largest integer smaller or equal to the float or double passed by parameter.

```java
double d = Math.floor(1.2);   // assigns 1.0 to d
float f = (float) Math.floor(-1.2f); // assigns -2.0f to f
int i = (int) Math.floor(1.2); // assigns 1 to i
```

### `round`

It has two signatures, and returns the closest `long` or `int` to the argument. In case of a tie (x.5), it rounds towards positive infinity.

```java
// the two signatures:
long round(double d);
int round(float f);

// examples
long l = Math.round(1.1);   // assigns 1 to l
long m = Math.round(1.5);   // assigns 2 to m
int i = Math.round(-1.2f);  // assigns -1 to i
int j = Math.round(-1.5f);  // assigns -1 to j
```

### `random`

`Math.random()` returns a random double value greater or equal than 0.0 and less than 1.0.

```java
double d = Math.random(); // e.g., assigns 0.18 to d
```

To get larger integers you can do:

```java
int i = (int)(Math.random() * 10);  // 0 to 9 because of the cast
long l = Math.round(Math.random() * 10); // 0 to 10
```

## Using the random class

The `java.util.Random` class lets you generate a stream of *pseudorandom* numbers, which means they are not truly random, buy random enough for practical purposes. 

The following example illustrate the basic usage of the `Random` class.

```java
void exampleMethod(){
	java.util.Random r = new java.util.Random(); // instantiate
	
	int i = r.nextInt(); // get a random int value
	int j = r.nextInt(20); // get a random int between 0 and 20
	double d = r.nextDouble(); // get a random double value
}
```

> Unlike `Math.random()` method, you need to first create an instance of the `Random` class, and call the appropriate `getXXX` method.
> 

### Using seed to create a Random instance

The random class has two constructors, the no-args one, and one that takes a `long` argument called “seed”. Seed is a number that is required for the internal algorithm of the Random class to function.

The random numbers generated by the algorithm depend on the seed. If two Random instances are created with the same seed value, then they will generate the same series of random numbers.

```java
java.util.Random r1 = new java.util.Random(10);
java.util.Random r2 = new java.util.Random(10);     
System.out.println(r1.nextInt()); //prints a random int     
System.out.println(r2.nextInt()); //prints the same random int as above
```

The no-args constructor sets the seed of the random number generator to a value very likely to be distinct from any other invocation of this constructor.

The Random class also has a `setSeed(long l)` method that resets the seed used to generate new random values.  This is how its used:

```java
void exampleMethod(){
	java.util.Random r = new java.util.Random(); // instantiate
	
	int i = r.nextInt(); // gets a random int
	r.setSeed(10000); // sets the seed to 10000
	i = r.nextInt(); // gets another random int
}
```

As you can see, the `Math.random()` method is way easier to use. However, you can find situations in which you need a `Stream` of random numbers, and the `Random` class has methods for that. However, the stream concept is not in the exam scope.